Good morning everyone.
>> Happy Sunday.
>> I hope you are enjoying the time we are
spending together here.
It's truly
precious and fortunate, right? I really
I really appreciate your effort and your
support of the Buddha Dharma.
So I want to say thank you again.
Now
it's a good time to reflect on the
benefit of this retreat and how to
continue making the teaching a natural
part of uh your everyday life.
and
constantly studying,
meditating,
continuously learn about the Buddha
Dharma,
um doing more
short retreats,
uh being part of u
supported community or SA members
and
creating
um sportive environment.
These methods
will help you
to improve your practice.
Buddha
Shakimi
established teachings
and he
created um
Buddhist
community called SA.
uh after he passed away
his sana continued to keep the dharma
teachings
and live together as a community and
benefit others.
So
all of us
old students and new students
need to
make as much effort as we can to
practice and benefit others.
Uh we have uh great opportunity to
practice dharma.
So
remembering Buddha's kindness
is a deeply meaningful part of Buddhist
practice.
Um
the Buddha
discovered this great path through
um undergoing such hardship within
six years and then he taught Dharma for
45 years
and
shared the path to liberation
that benefit us. So we need to repay his
kindness through our practice,
cultivating
wisdom,
generating bodhicitta,
benefiting others.
Um that's how we repay uh Buddha's
kindness.
Uh also offering your practice, offering
your daily activities.
Um remembering
his kindness all the time. All the time.
um and supporting
the SA who uh carries on the Buddhist
teachings
so important.
Um sometimes I wonder why do we engage
with so many
uh different kinds of deities
both you know peaceful and wrathful
instead of only practicing with
Buddhist.
Um
we usually think that different people
need different methods
uh different protectors whatever you
call it dies
um
it's like um
it's like a doctor who uses different
medicines for different sort of
illnesses. Right.
Um
that's why people need to different
methods, different practices, different
deities.
But ultimately
all deities are manifestation of the
Buddha
and um expression of the enlanted mind
and they're not
separate from Buddhist.
You always need to remember that
you can practice bama sambawa. You can
practice you know uh bajollaya you can
practice all these peaceful wrathful
deities but uh very important to
understand and um remember that all they
are not separate from Buddhakimi and uh
remember all these dies are
manifestation of Buddhakimi
Um that's then you can practice all
different kinds. But this is so
important because we have this Buddha
Dharma basically Buddha Shakimun he um
found this uh um path and give us really
um great
uh instructions and dharma teachings. So
it's just without him
um there's no way we can um
go through this path right so Buddha
provides
different methods to guide all beings
according to their needs.
Um so if you know who the Buddha is and
have a strong connection
to um
um or with him Buddha
then he is everything you know um so as
a Buddhist practitioner is very
important to practice Buddha every day
that's why we have this uh blessings
practice of Buddhist. I hope you will do
that every way every day. Um as your
main practice
uh and remember his kindness
um he is the you know source of all the
teachings we have today. Uh so the
Buddha
uh represents
uh fearless compassion and limitless
wisdom.
Uh his life and uh realizations are the
example we follow on the path to
enlightenment awakening.
So reflecting on his life helps us keep
going when the path feels
um difficult you know. So you have to
remember when you have uh you know um
difficult situations
how Buddha handle all these situations
and he found this path. So practicing
him and thinking about him um is
not only important but it's a way to
uh stay
fundamentally
grounded in the heart of the dharma. So
I just uh of course you know this no
matter what you you
practice different kinds of um deities
and um receive um different kinds of
teacher uh teachings and uh empowerments
or whatever
everything comes from Buddha. uh we have
to really deeply understand that and um
deeply we have to appreciate and uh
remember his kindness. I just want to
let you know that you you don't
need
um
empowerments and secret sort of
initiations or advanced
instructions to practice him. Right? You
just need practice the um the treasury
of u blessings a practice of Buddha by
uh mafuchi it's very common uh practice
these days everybody different this
Tibet you know we have four traditions
they all doesn't matter muchi belong to
uh uh the nying tradition but he respect
All so therefore these days everyone
practice this uh common uh Buddhist
you can say you know um his guru yoga or
turo blessings so
um
at least
every day nothing else if you don't have
time to practice but just remember
um without Buddha we don't have this all
this amazing profound and vast teaching
today. We don't have that. So that's
because of him. So there's reason we can
uh we have to remember his kindness and
make offerings to him. Um study uh his
teachings and meditate on bodhicitta
with mindfulness.
Um help others as much as you can.
That's all we need cuz Buddha the he in
the sutras he many time he say if you
want to repay my kindness you have to
practice bodhitta
uh and uh uh wisdom so that's his uh you
know wishes and uh so we should as a
Buddhist practitioner follow Buddha we
should do that every single day it's not
that difficult that in order to practice
the treasury blessings of practice
Buddhy. You don't need anything. You
don't need empowerment. You don't need
nothing. Just um I give you the written
transmission. Um so just do that every
single day and remember his kindness. um
that helps your bodhic chitta grow and
uh um and helps you really want to
practice more and more uh Buddhist
you know teachings
just let you know that now I'm going to
pick up where I left of uh last class
today we start with the 31st verse
um
it says
If you do not examine your mistakes, you
may look like a practitioner but not act
as one. Thus, always examine your
mistakes and abandoning them is practice
of bodhic satta. This is so important
verse you know right
uh this verse you know highlights the
importance of selfreflection
and the part of bodhic sattva right part
of bodhic satta bodhic sattvas always
you know investigate themselves and
their actions and their motivations and
all that. So this verse it says you may
look like a practitioner but not act as
one. It's really true you know um we we
all think we are Buddhist and we are
practitioners but um maybe but maybe
not. So we have to sort of uh self this
selfreflection
uh is the you know if you take this
journey this bo bodhic sata's path this
um this is very important
true practice comes from inner
transformation
and inner experiences right um which
requires
continues self-examination
um in Mahayana Buddhism you know if we
don't reflect on mystics
we may it says you know like we may
appear to be a practitioner
but uh will not have the good qualities
of uh true bodhic sattvas us.
Um,
if we look carefully,
our actions may not be quite as
genuine as they appear to others.
Therefore, it is very important to check
our motivation.
Whatever we do, whatever we say,
whatever we think, right? If you read
the Buddha's sutras, his teachings like
the way he talk, he just talks very
mindfully. The way he walks very
mindfully, you know, we are just so fast
without thinking talk blah blah blah.
And then even though we don't have
really bad motivations, but sometimes
we're not aware of what we are talking
then sometimes hurt others.
So
uh so if we don't um
investigate our motivation, motivation
is is really important. If you practice
bodhicitta so then your motivation is
good then everything will be positive
that's for sure. So therefore it is very
important to check your motivation.
um whatever you think, whatever you say.
Um so this sort of ongoing
process of selfreflection
and um correction
is essential for progressing on the
Mahayana Buddhist path. So we have good
intentions but uh you know from time to
time uh we may lose it right. So
therefore this verse suggest uh we
should always examine our practice
uh as a bodhic sattva as a bodhic sattva
uh taking bodhicatta path. So generally
speaking our practice is somewhat uh
mixed with um certain amount of dharma
and certain amount of nondharma.
So it's necessary
um that uh we take responsibility for
our own mistakes and uh uh work with
them through you know examination.
Um uh great master ata said do not find
the fault with others find the faults in
yourself and remove them or change them.
Um it's it's very important for uh
Mahayana practitioners
as Gamba said um to hold profound
instructions but not transform yourself
is a hidden fault of practitioners.
So by examining
your thoughts
uh words and actions uh you can
recognize you know harmful habits.
Um if we don't go through this constant
check and process then it is possible to
uh act in a nonspiritual way.
Um so you know true practitioners don't
ignore their faults but always try to
um work on them. Uh the bodhic sattvas
always always look into themselves
instead of looking at others.
So this verse is a sort of a warning to
all practitioners
who lack mindfulness
or who are
um sort of proud about their so-called
Mahayana practice.
Um and such people uh may you know
outwardly appear
as genuine practitioners
yet inwardly they are filled with
harmful intent. So we can see that these
days you know everywhere. So Shandwa
strongly advised that we should always
put effort to recognize our faults
rather than focus on the faults of uh
others. Uh so if we practice
Mahayana Buddhism uh we must live a life
of virtue and avoid
uh harming others. Uh bring happiness to
others
and
um take care of others uh with respect
with with kindness. That's Mahayana
practitioner's responsibility work job.
Uh so we have to remind ourselves to be
more mindful.
So important mindfulness is now I can uh
see more and more every day. How
important be mindful whatever you do say
think you know and uh try our best not
to harm anyone
with actions of our body speech and mind
right as a always we have to remember I
am a Mahayana Buddhist practitioner so
that I need to investigate myself other
than you know my teachers always said
that you know thinking I am a dharma
practitioner doesn't make us one just
thinking I am I took refuge vows and I
received this and that teachings and I
practice regularly so I'm a practitioner
maybe true maybe not so you only you
know you are genuine dharma practitioner
or not so just Insight you know insight
nobody knows just you. So you know
taking the bodhic sattva vow uh or you
know
dantic initiations
um also does not mean we are dharma
practitioner. It does not mean at all
our mind has been transformed.
Um, dharma practitioners
subdue
the disturbing emotions
uh and negative actions.
So we can you know look like a great
teacher.
That's not difficult to do. Uh it's just
a superficial
uh external appearance. Right? If
someone you know for example a teacher
you know who sits on beautiful uh you
know high throne it does not mean at all
that person is a good teacher or you
know um we have this Tibetan we have
Turka you know
if there is a jealousy
competition
um and they want to be you respected
and feel that they are they are special.
It it's unfortunately you know it's it's
superficial.
So in this
um
in in in essence this verse
uh teaches that genuine pract practice
uh involves
honesty with ourselves
recognizing
mistakes through uh examination
and then removing them. If you see
something is wrong then you have to
change it. Um that is practice of bodhic
sattas. It says not me
said that's right. So you know just just
just remember this verse you know if you
do not examine your mistakes you may
look like a practitioner but not act as
one. Thus always examining your
mistakes, abandoning them is the
practice of bodhisatta.
It's um I love this verse.
Okay, that's important. Uh now the next
32nd verse is uh
Um
it says under the influence of delusive
emotions if you speak of the faults of
other bodhic sattvas you yourself will
be diminished. Thus not mentioning the
faults of those who have entered the
Mahayana path is the practice of bodhic
satta.
This verse deals with um
criticism, right? Others on the Mahayana
part especially when uh motivated by
negative emotions like jealousy,
arrogance, selfishness or anger. Um so
um speaking negatively about other
bodhic sattvas creates negative actions.
Adisha said you know if you um displace
a novel being which is bodhicattvas
right um he said it it is like a death
you know. Uh so what we
perceive as false and and others is
probably from our own delusion.
Uh maybe this person is um
sort of uh how do hidden bodhic sattva
you know we don't really know. We don't
really know. Uh Tibetan
say that um we would never know where
bodhi sattas and thieves are.
U so these days you know dharma
practitioners are everywhere.
A good thing. So we uh as Mahayana
practitioners should not be um
criticizing anyone.
Um he will destroy our own
uh faith um and um um realization
bodhic jetta and we are the ones who um
who lose you know uh so
um
that's why uh
We
never know uh where body suffers are you
know uh it's uh you know when we speak
about the faults of others u the anger
uh in our mind will diminish our
bodhicitta
especially when it comes to
uh bodhic sattas from the mahayana
tradition their their action their
behavior is not easy to understand.
You know like um think about uh what um
Marba uh do you know Marba right Marba
Marba did to Malaripa
it's not easy to understand
Marba's motivation
at that time
uh
it's not easy to understand his mot I
mean at that time like how you know um
Marba made me suffer a lot
you can't really imagine you know um but
we don't know what Marba's motivation so
therefore I mean we should make um
make a vow how
not to use divisive talk to criticize
others.
So before speaking about someone's
faults,
my teachers always say, you know, ask
yourself,
is this true?
Am I saying
this from my wisdom or my ego
under the control of anger?
is the
is this beneficial or not?
If if it's not coming from a pure
intention,
my teacher said it's best to remain
silent
because
um pausing before speaking allows us to
um
reconsider
whether our words are necessary.
Silence can be a very uh powerful
practice in itself and helps to break
the anger of speaking.
So bodhic sattvas
use
the faults they see in others as mirals
you know for uh self-reflection.
So there may be situations where um
addressing someone's faults seems
necessary
to prevent
harm or help someone correct a
misunderstanding.
In such cases you know bodhic sattva
must act skillfully and act with
respect.
So usually whenever we talk about um
something we start to criticize someone
else and by focusing on criticizing
others based on negative emotions
which lead to uh to misjudgment.
So this verse um
explained
in the context of Mahayana practice
uh but it is equally true for
nonpractitioners.
So in all cases you know it's good to
avoid looking for faults of others and
not speak about what we think we have we
have found.
So
always Mahayana practitioners think
about um ourselves right. So that's
that's the key and so that you will not
never lose your body.
Now the next 33rd
It says desire for gain and honor leads
to uh arguments right and the decline of
the activities of listening
uh contemplating and meditating.
Thus giving up attachment to the
households of friends, relations and uh
benefactors is the practice of
bodhicattas.
This verse deals with the
uh dangers of attachment to worldly
gain, honor and relationships
and emphasizing how they can you know
obstruct um genuine spiritual practice.
So um give up attachment to people
uh who helps us because
uh this attachment does not particularly
come from the qualities of the person
but from our hope for you know wealth,
respect or honor. Uh so when we become
extremely attached to this kind of uh uh
situations
this lead to um two problems
uh conflict and the declining of our
practice.
So this attachment
uh binds us to worldly concerns
and um distract us from our dharma
practice and we have less interest in
this essential practice.
Um
if if I'm strongly attached to my
reputation
and my position
and then someone is um disrespectful,
it upset me, right? Uh then I will never
be able to have a peaceful mind.
Um if I have that kind of a strong
emotion or attachment
uh I would be upset if someone has a
better reputation than me
then there is a competition comes right
that means that means I'm attached to my
position
and worldly concerns
then always I'll be upset
I don't have peaceful mind then right so
it says here give up attachment to the
the households of family friends and
sponsors
[Music]
this does not mean we should simply give
up all relationships right rather it
means we should give up attachment ment
and relationships that could lead
nondharma activities.
So attachment here refers to claiming to
relationships for personal benefit and
uh using others for our own ego benefit.
Sometimes people act very like holy
right when their um what do you call it
benefactors are around they are they are
good you know good at this things and
they put them in a position where they
cannot say no
um it can certainly happen right so this
behavior can be a subtle form of uh
manipulation.
Um so from a spiritual perspective this
behavior is a kind of hypocrisy
or ego claiming. So therefore
himself said
uh another his teaching he said like to
feel satisfied with whatever you have
that is the ultimate wealth
and not to be attached to anything at
all that is the ultimate happiness.
Bodhi sattas like you know
live a life
given unconditional
love and kindness to all.
Yet they do so with nonattachment.
So nonattachment
and mahayana Buddhism
does not mean abandoning.
It simply means
not having a grasping or clinging
um attitude towards anything or anyone.
It means
living with u contentment.
um benefiting all beings equally.
So
this verse
advises
renouncing attachment
so that our practice
remains pure.
Right.
Um,
okay.
Now,
we're going to stop here.